§ 14

Dissipation of Energy

Energy may become dissipated. Where does it go? since if it is
indestructible it must still exist. It is easier to ask the question
than to give a final answer, and it is not possible in this OUTLINE,
where an advanced knowledge of physics is not assumed on the part of the
reader, to go fully into the somewhat difficult theories put forward by
physicists and chemists. We may raise the temperature, say, of iron,
until it is white-hot. If we stop the process the temperature of the
iron will gradually settle down to the temperature of surrounding
bodies. As it does so, where does its previous energy go? In some
measure it may pass to other bodies in contact with the piece of iron,
but ultimately the heat becomes radiated away in space where we cannot
follow it. It has been added to the vast reservoir of _unavailable_ heat
energy of uniform temperature. It is sufficient here to say that if all
bodies had a uniform temperature we should experience no such thing as
heat, because heat only travels from one body to another, having the
effect of cooling the one and warming the other. In time the two bodies
acquire the same temperature. The sum-total of the heat in any body is
measured in terms of the kinetic energy of its moving molecules.

There must come a time, so far as we can see at present, when, even if
all the heat energy of the universe is not radiated away into empty
infinite space, yet a uniform temperature will prevail. If one body is
hotter than another it radiates heat to that body until both are at the
same temperature. Each body may still possess a considerable quantity of
heat energy, which it has absorbed, but that energy, so far as reactions
between those two bodies are concerned, _is now unavailable_. The same
principle applies whatever number of bodies we consider. Before heat
energy can be utilised we must have bodies with different temperature.
If the whole universe were at some uniform temperature, then, although
it might possess an enormous amount of heat energy, this energy would be
unavailable.


What a Uniform Temperature would mean

And what does this imply? It implies a great deal: for if all the energy
in the world became unavailable, the universe, as it now is, would cease
to be. It is possible that, by the constant interchange of heat
radiations, the whole universe is tending to some uniform temperature,
in which case, although all molecular motion would not have ceased, it
would have become unavailable. In this sense it may be said that the
universe is running down.

[Illustration: NIAGARA FALLS

The energy of this falling water is prodigious. It is used to generate
thousands of horse-power in great electrical installations. The power is
used to drive electric trams in cities 150 to 250 miles away.]

[Illustration: _Photo: Stephen Cribb._

TRANSFORMATION OF ENERGY

An illustration of Energy. The chemical energy brought into existence by
firing the explosive manifesting itself as mechanical energy, sufficient
to impart violent motion to tons of water.]

[Illustration: _Photo: Underwood & Underwood._

"BOILING" A KETTLE ON ICE

When a kettle containing liquid air is placed on ice it "boils" because
the ice is intensely hot _when compared with the very low temperature of
the liquid air_.]

If all the molecules of a substance were brought to a standstill, that
substance would be at the absolute zero of temperature. There could be
nothing colder. The temperature at which all molecular motions would
cease is known: it is -273° C. No body could possibly attain a lower
temperature than this: a lower temperature could not exist. Unless there
exists in nature some process, of which we know nothing at present,
whereby energy is renewed, our solar system must one day sink to this
absolute zero of temperature. The sun, the earth, and every other body
in the universe is steadily radiating heat, and this radiation cannot go
on for ever, because heat continually tends to diffuse and to equalise
temperatures.

But we can see, theoretically, that there is a way of evading this law.
If the chaotic molecular motions which constitute heat could be
_regulated_, then the heat energy of a body could be utilised directly.
Some authorities think that some of the processes which go on in the
living body do not involve any waste energy, that the chemical energy of
food is transformed directly into work without any of it being
dissipated as useless heat energy. It may be, therefore, that man will
finally discover some way of escape from the natural law that, while
energy cannot be destroyed, it has a tendency to become unavailable.

The primary reservoir of energy is the atom; it is the energy of the
atom, the atom of elements in the sun, the stars, the earth, from which
nature draws for all her supply of energy. Shall we ever discover how we
can replenish the dwindling resources of energy, or find out how we can
call into being the at present unavailable energy which is stored up in
uniform temperature?

    It looks as if our successors would witness an interesting race,
    between the progress of science on the one hand and the depletion of
    natural resources upon the other. The natural rate of flow of energy
    from its primary atomic reservoirs to the sea of waste heat energy
    of uniform temperature, allows life to proceed at a complete pace
    sternly regulated by the inexorable laws of supply and demand,
    which the biologists have recognised in their field as the struggle
    for existence.[5]

    [5] _Matter and Energy_, by Professor Soddy.

It is certain that energy is an actual entity just as much as matter,
and that it cannot be created or destroyed. Matter and ether are
receptacles or vehicles of energy. As we have said, what these entities
really are in themselves we do not know. It may be that all forms of
energy are in some fundamental way aspects of the same primary entity
which constitutes matter: how all matter is constituted of particles of
electricity we have already seen. The question to which we await an
answer is: What is electricity?


§ 15

MATTER, ETHER, AND EINSTEIN

The supreme synthesis, the crown of all this progressive conquest of
nature, would be to discover that the particles of positive and negative
electricity, which make up the atoms of matter, are points or centres of
disturbances of some kind in a universal ether, and that all our
"energies" (light, magnetism, gravitation, etc.) are waves or strains of
some kind set up in the ether by these clusters of electrons.

It is a fascinating, tantalising dream. Larmor suggested in 1900 that
the electron is a tiny whirlpool, or "vortex," in ether; and, as such a
vortex may turn in either of two opposite ways, we seem to see a
possibility of explaining positive and negative electricity. But the
difficulties have proved very serious, and the nature of the electron is
unknown. A recent view is that it is "a ring of negative electricity
rotating about its axis at a high speed," though that does not carry us
very far. The unit of positive electricity is even less known. We must
be content to know the general lines on which thought is moving toward
the final unification.

We say "unification," but it would be a grave error to think that ether
is the only possible basis for such unity, or to make it an essential
part of one's philosophy of the universe. Ether was never more than an
imagined entity to which we ascribed the most extraordinary properties,
and which seemed then to promise considerable aid. It was conceived as
an elastic solid of very great density, stretching from end to end of
the universe, transmitting waves from star to star at the rate of
186,000 miles a second; yet it was believed that the most solid matter
passed through it as if it did not exist.

Some years ago a delicate experiment was tried for the purpose of
detecting the ether. Since the earth, in travelling round the sun, must
move through the ether if the ether exists, there ought to be a stream
of ether flowing through every laboratory; just as the motion of a ship
through a still atmosphere will make "a wind." In 1887 Michelson and
Morley tried to detect this. Theoretically, a ray of light in the
direction of the stream ought to travel at a different rate from a ray
of light against the stream or across it. They found no difference, and
scores of other experiments have failed. This does not prove that there
is no ether, as there is reason to suppose that our instruments would
appear to shrink in precisely the same proportion as the alteration of
the light; but the fact remains that we have no proof of the existence
of ether. J. H. Jeans says that "nature acts as if no such thing
existed." Even the phenomena of light and magnetism, he says, do not
imply ether; and he thinks that the hypothesis may be abandoned. The
primary reason, of course, for giving up the notion of the ether is
that, as Einstein has shown, there is no way of detecting its existence.
If there is an ether, then, since the earth is moving through it, there
should be some way of detecting this motion. The experiment has been
tried, as we have said, but, although the method used was very
sensitive, no motion was discovered. It is Einstein who, by
revolutionising our conceptions of space and time, showed that no such
motion ever could be discovered, whatever means were employed, and that
the usual notion of the ether must be abandoned. We shall explain this
theory more fully in a later section.


INFLUENCE OF THE TIDES: ORIGIN OF THE MOON: THE EARTH SLOWING DOWN

§ 16

Until comparatively recent times, until, in fact, the full dawn of
modern science, the tides ranked amongst the greatest of nature's
mysteries. And, indeed, what agency could be invoked to explain this
mysteriously regular flux and reflux of the waters of the ocean? It is
not surprising that that steady, rhythmical rise and fall suggested to
some imaginative minds the breathing of a mighty animal. And even when
man first became aware of the fact that this regular movement was
somehow associated with the moon, was he much nearer an explanation?
What bond could exist between the movements of that distant world and
the diurnal variation of the waters of the earth? It is reported that an
ancient astronomer, despairing of ever resolving the mystery, drowned
himself in the sea.


The Earth Pulled by the Moon

But it was part of the merit of Newton's mighty theory of gravitation
that it furnished an explanation even of this age-old mystery. We can
see, in broad outlines at any rate, that the theory of universal
attraction can be applied to this case. For the moon, Newton taught us,
pulls every particle of matter throughout the earth. If we imagine that
part of the earth's surface which comprises the Pacific Ocean, for
instance, to be turned towards the moon, we see that the moon's pull,
_acting on the loose and mobile water_, would tend to heap it up into a
sort of mound. The whole earth is pulled by the moon, but the water
is more free to obey this pull than is the solid earth, although small
tides are also caused in the earth's solid crust. It can be shown also
that a corresponding hump would tend to be produced on the other side of
the earth, owing, in this case, to the tendency of the water, being more
loosely connected, to lag behind the solid earth. If the earth's surface
were entirely fluid the rotation of the earth would give the impression
that these two humps were continually travelling round the world, once
every day. At any given part of the earth's surface, therefore, there
would be two humps daily, i.e. two periods of high water. Such is the
simplest possible outline of the gravitational theory of the tides.

[Illustration: THE CAUSE OF TIDES

The tides of the sea are due to the pull of the moon, and, in lesser
degree, of the sun. The whole earth is pulled by the moon, but the loose
and mobile water is more free to obey this pull than is the solid earth,
although small tides are also caused in the earth's solid crust. The
effect which the tides have on slowing down the rotation of the earth is
explained in the text.]

[Illustration: _Photo: G. Brocklehurst._

THE AEGIR ON THE TRENT

An exceptionally smooth formation due to perfect weather conditions. The
wall-like formation of these tidal waves (see next page also) will be
noticed. The reason for this is that the downward current in the river
heads the sea-water back, and thus helps to exaggerate the advancing
slope of the wave. The exceptional spring tides are caused by the
combined operation of the moon and the sun, as is explained in the
text.]

[Illustration: _Photo: G. Brocklehurst._

A BIG SPRING TIDE, THE AEGIR ON THE TRENT]

The actually observed phenomena are vastly more complicated, and the
complete theory bears very little resemblance to the simple form we have
just outlined. Everyone who lives in the neighbourhood of a port knows,
for instance, that high water seldom coincides with the time when the
moon crosses the meridian. It may be several hours early or late. High
water at London Bridge, for instance, occurs about one and a half hours
after the moon has passed the meridian, while at Dublin high water
occurs about one and a half hours before the moon crosses the meridian.
The actually observed phenomena, then, are far from simple; they have,
nevertheless, been very completely worked out, and the times of high
water for every port in the world can now be prophesied for a
considerable time ahead.


The Action of Sun and Moon

It would be beyond our scope to attempt to explain the complete theory,
but we may mention one obvious factor which must be taken into account.
Since the moon, by its gravitational attraction, produces tides, we
should expect that the sun, whose gravitational attraction is so much
stronger, should also produce tides and, we would suppose at first
sight, more powerful tides than the moon. But while it is true that the
sun produces tides, it is not true that they are more powerful than
those produced by the moon. The sun's tide-producing power is, as a
matter of fact, less than half that of the moon. The reason of this is
that _distance_ plays an enormous rôle in the production of tides. The
mass of the sun is 26,000,000 times that of the moon; on the other hand
it is 386 times as far off as the moon. This greater distance more than
counterbalances its greater mass, and the result, as we have said, is
that the moon is more than twice as powerful. Sometimes the sun and moon
act together, and we have what are called spring tides; sometimes they
act against one another, and we have neap tides. These effects are
further complicated by a number of other factors, and the tides, at
various places, vary enormously. Thus at St. Helena the sea rises and
falls about three feet, whereas in the Bay of Fundy it rises and falls
more than fifty feet. But here, again, the reasons are complicated.


§ 17

Origin of the Moon

But there is another aspect of the tides which is of vastly greater
interest and importance than the theory we have just been discussing. In
the hands of Sir George H. Darwin, the son of Charles Darwin, the tides
had been made to throw light on the evolution of our solar system. In
particular, they have illustrated the origin and development of the
system formed by our earth and moon. It is quite certain that, long ages
ago, the earth was rotating immensely faster than it is now, and that
the moon was so near as to be actually in contact with the earth. In
that remote age the moon was just on the point of separating from the
earth, of being thrown off by the earth. Earth and moon were once one
body, but the high rate of rotation caused this body to split up into
two pieces; one piece became the earth we now know, and the other became
the moon. Such is the conclusion to which we are led by an examination
of the tides. In the first place let us consider the energy produced by
the tides. We see evidences of this energy all round the word's
coastlines. Estuaries are scooped out, great rocks are gradually reduced
to rubble, innumerable tons of matter are continually being set in
movement. Whence is this energy derived? Energy, like matter, cannot be
created from nothing; what, then, is the source which makes this
colossal expenditure possible.


The Earth Slowing down

The answer is simple, but startling. _The source of tidal energy is the
rotation of the earth._ The massive bulk of the earth, turning every
twenty-four hours on its axis, is like a gigantic flywheel. In virtue of
its rotation it possesses an enormous store of energy. But even the
heaviest and swiftest flywheel, if it is doing work, or even if it is
only working against the friction of its bearings, cannot dispense
energy for ever. It must, gradually, slow down. There is no escape from
this reasoning. It is the rotation of the earth which supplies the
energy of the tides, and, as a consequence, the tides must be slowing
down the earth. The tides act as a kind of brake on the earth's
rotation. These masses of water, _held back by the moon_, exert a kind
of dragging effect on the rotating earth. Doubtless this effect,
measured by our ordinary standards, is very small; it is, however,
continuous, and in the course of the millions of years dealt with in
astronomy, this small but constant effect may produce very considerable
results.

But there is another effect which can be shown to be a necessary
mathematical consequence of tidal action. It is the moon's action on the
earth which produces the tides, but they also react on the moon. The
tides are slowing down the earth, and they are also driving the moon
farther and farther away. This result, strange as it may seem, does not
permit of doubt, for it is the result of an indubitable dynamical
principle, which cannot be made clear without a mathematical discussion.
Some interesting consequences follow.

Since the earth is slowing down, it follows that it was once rotating
faster. There was a period, a long time ago, when the day comprised only
twenty hours. Going farther back still we come to a day of ten hours,
until, inconceivable ages ago, the earth must have been rotating on its
axis in a period of from three to four hours.

At this point let us stop and inquire what was happening to the moon. We
have seen that at present the moon is getting farther and farther away.
It follows, therefore, that when the day was shorter the moon was
nearer. As we go farther back in time we find the moon nearer and nearer
to an earth rotating faster and faster. When we reach the period we have
already mentioned, the period when the earth completed a revolution in
three or four hours, we find that the moon was so near as to be almost
grazing the earth. This fact is very remarkable. Everybody knows that
there is a _critical velocity_ for a rotating flywheel, a velocity
beyond which the flywheel would fly into pieces because the centrifugal
force developed is so great as to overcome the cohesion of the molecules
of the flywheel. We have already likened our earth to a flywheel, and we
have traced its history back to the point where it was rotating with
immense velocity. We have also seen that, at that moment, the moon was
barely separated from the earth. The conclusion is irresistible. In an
age more remote the earth _did_ fly in pieces, and one of those pieces
is the moon. Such, in brief outline, is the tidal theory of the origin
of the earth-moon system.


The Day Becoming Longer

At the beginning, when the moon split off from the earth, it obviously
must have shared the earth's rotation. It flew round the earth in the
same time that the earth rotated, that is to say, the month and the day
were of equal length. As the moon began to get farther from the earth,
the month, because the moon took longer to rotate round the earth, began
to get correspondingly longer. The day also became longer, because the
earth was slowing down, taking longer to rotate on its axis, but the
month increased at a greater rate than the day. Presently the month
became equal to two days, then to three, and so on. It has been
calculated that this process went on until there were twenty-nine days
in the month. After that the number of days in the month began to
decrease until it reached its present value or magnitude, and will
continue to decrease until once more the month and the day are equal. In
that age the earth will be rotating very slowly. The braking action of
the tides will cause the earth always to keep the same face to the moon;
it will rotate on its axis in the same time that the moon turns round
the earth. If nothing but the earth and moon were involved this state of
affairs would be final. But there is also the effect of the solar tides
to be considered. The moon makes the day equal to the month, but the sun
has a tendency, by still further slowing down the earth's rotation on
its axis, to make the day equal to the year. It would do this, of
course, by making the earth take as long to turn on its axis as to go
round the sun. It cannot succeed in this, owing to the action of the
moon, but it can succeed in making the day rather longer than the month.

Surprising as it may seem, we already have an illustration of this
possibility in the satellites of Mars. The Martian day is about one
half-hour longer than ours, but when the two minute satellites of Mars
were discovered it was noticed that the inner one of the two revolved
round Mars in about seven hours forty minutes. In one Martian day,
therefore, one of the moons of Mars makes more than three complete
revolutions round that planet, so that, to an inhabitant of Mars, there
would be more than three months in a day.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

 ARRHENIUS, SVANTE, _Worlds in the Making_.
 CLERK-MAXWELL, JAMES, _Matter and Motion_.
 DANIELL, ALFRED, _A Text-Book of the Principles of Physics_.
 DARWIN, SIR G. H., _The Tides_.
 HOLMAN, _Matter, Energy, Force and Work_.
 KAPP, GISBERT, _Electricity_.
 KELVIN, LORD, _Popular Lectures and Addresses_. Vol. i. _Constitution
   of Matter._
 LOCKYER, SIR NORMAN, _Inorganic Evolution_.
 LODGE, SIR OLIVER, _Electrons_ and _The Ether of Space_.
 PERRIN, JEAN, _Brownian Movement and Molecular Reality_.
 SODDY, FREDERICK, _Matter and Energy_ and _The Interpretation of Radium_.
 THOMPSON, SILVANUS P., _Light, Visible and Invisible_.
 THOMSON, SIR J. J., _The Corpuscular Theory of Matter_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Outline of Science, Vol. 1 (of 4), by 
J. Arthur Thomson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUTLINE OF SCIENCE ***

***** This file should be named 20417-8.txt or 20417-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/4/1/20417/

Produced by Brian Janes, Leonard Johnson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
