THE BIRTH AND DEATH OF STARS

§ 3

Variable, New, and Dark Stars: Dying Suns

Many astronomers believe that in "variable stars" we have another star,
following that of the dullest red star, in the dying of suns. The light
of these stars varies periodically in so many days, weeks, or years. It
is interesting to speculate that they are slowly dying suns, in which
the molten interior periodically bursts through the shell of thick
vapours that is gathering round them. What we saw about our sun seems to
point to some such stage in the future. That is, however, not the
received opinion about variable stars. It may be that they are stars
which periodically pass through a great swarm of meteors or a region of
space that is rich in cosmic dust of some sort, when, of course, a great
illumination would take place.

One class of these variable stars, which takes its name from the star
Algol, is of special interest. Every third night Algol has its light
reduced for several hours. Modern astronomy has discovered that in this
case there are really two stars, circulating round a common centre, and
that every third night the fainter of the two comes directly between us
and its companion and causes an "eclipse." This was until recently
regarded as a most interesting case in which a dead star revealed itself
to us by passing before the light of another star. But astronomers have
in recent years invented something, the "selenium-cell," which is even
more sensitive than the photographic plate, and on this the supposed
dead star registers itself as very much alive. Algol is, however,
interesting in another way. The pair of stars which we have discovered
in it are hundreds of trillions of miles away from the earth, yet we
know their masses and their distances from each other.


The Death and Birth of Stars

We have no positive knowledge of dead stars; which is not surprising
when we reflect that a dead star means an invisible star! But when we
see so many individual stars tending toward death, when we behold a vast
population of all conceivable ages, we presume that there are many
already dead. On the other hand, there is no reason to suppose that the
universe as a whole is "running down." Some writers have maintained
this, but their argument implies that we know a great deal more about
the universe than we actually do. The scientific man does not know
whether the universe is finite or infinite, temporal or eternal; and he
declines to speculate where there are no facts to guide him. He knows
only that the great gaseous nebulæ promise myriads of worlds in the
future, and he concedes the possibility that new nebulæ may be forming
in the ether of space.

The last, and not the least interesting, subject we have to notice is
the birth of a "new star." This is an event which astronomers now
announce every few years; and it is a far more portentous event than the
reader imagines when it is reported in his daily paper. The story is
much the same in all cases. We say that the star appeared in 1901, but
you begin to realise the magnitude of the event when you learn that the
distant "blaze" had really occurred about the time of the death of
Luther! The light of the conflagration had been speeding toward us
across space at 186,000 miles a second, yet it has taken nearly three
centuries to reach us. To be visible at all to us at that distance the
fiery outbreak must have been stupendous. If a mass of petroleum ten
times the size of the earth were suddenly fired it would not be seen at
such a distance. The new star had increased its light many hundredfold
in a few days.

There is a considerable fascination about the speculation that in such
cases we see the resurrection of a dead world, a means of renewing the
population of the universe. What happens is that in some region of the
sky where no star, or only a very faint star, had been registered on our
charts, we almost suddenly perceive a bright star. In a few days it may
rise to the highest brilliancy. By the spectroscope we learn that this
distant blaze means a prodigious outpour of white-hot hydrogen at
hundreds of miles a second. But the star sinks again after a few months,
and we then find a nebula round it on every side. It is natural to
suppose that a dead or dying sun has somehow been reconverted in whole
or in part into a nebula. A few astronomers think that it may have
partially collided with another star, or approached too closely to
another, with the result we described on an earlier page. The general
opinion now is that a faint or dead star had rushed into one of those
regions of space in which there are immense stretches of nebulous
matter, and been (at least in part) vaporised by the friction.

But the difficulties are considerable, and some astronomers prefer to
think that the blazing star may merely have lit up a dark nebula which
already existed. It is one of those problems on which speculation is
most tempting but positive knowledge is still very incomplete. We may be
content, even proud, that already we can take a conflagration that has
occurred more than a thousand trillion miles away and analyse it
positively into an outflame of glowing hydrogen gas at so many miles a
second.


THE SHAPE OF OUR UNIVERSE

§ 4

Our Universe a Spiral Nebula

What is the shape of our universe, and what are its dimensions? This is
a tremendous question to ask. It is like asking an intelligent insect,
living on a single leaf in the midst of a great Brazilian forest, to say
what is the shape and size of the forest. Yet man's ingenuity has proved
equal to giving an answer even to this question, and by a method exactly
similar to that which would be adopted by the insect. Suppose, for
instance, that the forest was shaped as an elongated oval, and the
insect lived on a tree near the centre of the oval. If the trees were
approximately equally spaced from one another they would appear much
denser along the length of the oval than across its width. This is the
simple consideration that has guided astronomers in determining the
shape of our stellar universe. There is one direction in the heavens
along which the stars appear denser than in the directions at right
angles to it. That direction is the direction in which we look towards
the Milky Way. If we count the number of stars visible all over the
heavens, we find they become more and more numerous as we approach the
Milky Way. As we go farther and farther from the Milky Way the stars
thin out until they reach a maximum sparseness in directions at right
angles to the plane of the Milky Way. We may consider the Milky Way to
form, as it were, the equator of our system, and the line at right
angles to point to the north and south poles.

Our system, in fact, is shaped something like a lens, and our sun is
situated near the centre of this lens. In the remoter part of this lens,
near its edge, or possibly outside it altogether, lies the great series
of star clouds which make up the Milky Way. All the stars are in motion
within this system, but the very remarkable discovery has been made that
these motions are not entirely random. The great majority of the stars
whose motions can be measured fall into two groups drifting past one
another in opposite directions. The velocity of one stream relative to
the other is about twenty-five miles per second. The stars forming these
two groups are thoroughly well mixed; it is not a case of an inner
stream going one way and an outer stream the other. But there are not
quite as many stars going one way as the other. For every two stars in
one stream there are three in the other. Now, as we have said, some
eminent astronomers hold that the spiral nebulæ are universes like our
own, and if we look at the two photographs (Figs. 25 and 26) we see that
these spirals present features which, in the light of what we have just
said about our system, are very remarkable. The nebula in Coma Berenices
is a spiral edge-on to us, and we see that it has precisely the
lens-shaped middle and the general flattened shape that we have found in
our own system. The nebula in Canes Venatici is a spiral facing towards
us, and its shape irresistibly suggests motions along the spiral arms.
This motion, whether it is towards or away from the central, lens-shaped
portion, would cause a double streaming motion in that central portion
of the kind we have found in our own system. Again, and altogether apart
from these considerations, there are good reasons for supposing our
Milky Way to possess a double-armed spiral structure. And the great
patches of dark absorbing matter which are known to exist in the Milky
Way (see Fig. 22) would give very much the mottled appearance we notice
in the arms (which we see edge-on) of the nebula in Coma Berenices. The
hypothesis, therefore, that our universe is a spiral nebula has much to
be said for it. If it be accepted it greatly increases our estimate of
the size of the material universe. For our central, lens-shaped system
is calculated to extend towards the Milky Way for more than twenty
thousand times a million million miles, and about a third of this
distance towards what we have called the poles. If, as we suppose, each
spiral nebula is an independent stellar universe comparable in size with
our own, then, since there are hundreds of thousands of spiral nebulæ,
we see that the size of the whole material universe is indeed beyond our
comprehension.

[Illustration: _Photo: Mount Wilson Observatory._

FIG. 26.--A SPIRAL NEBULA SEEN EDGE-ON

Notice the lens-shaped formation of the nucleus and the arm stretching
as a band across it. See reference in the text to the resemblance
between this and our stellar universe.]

[Illustration: _Photo: H. J. Shepstone._

100-INCH TELESCOPE, MOUNT WILSON

A reflecting telescope: the largest in the world. The mirror is situated
at the base of the telescope.]

[Illustration:

  ________________________________________________________________
 |                                                                |
 |                        THE SOLAR SYSTEM                        |
 |________________________________________________________________|
 |         |               |            |            |            |
 |         | MEAN DISTANCE | PERIOD OF  |            |            |
 |  NAME   | FROM SUN (IN  | REVOLUTION |  DIAMETER  | NUMBER OF  |
 |         |  MILLIONS OF  | AROUND SUN | (IN MILES) | SATELLITES |
 |         |    MILES)     | (IN YEARS) |            |            |
 |_________|_______________|____________|____________|____________|
 |         |               |            |            |            |
 | MERCURY |      36.0     |     0.24   |    3030    |      0     |
 | VENUS   |      67.2     |     0.62   |    7700    |      0     |
 | EARTH   |      92.9     |     1.00   |    7918    |      1     |
 | MARS    |     141.5     |     1.88   |    4230    |      2     |
 | JUPITER |     483.3     |    11.86   |   86500    |      9     |
 | SATURN  |     886.0     |    29.46   |   73000    |     10     |
 | URANUS  |    1781.9     |    84.02   |   31900    |      4     |
 | NEPTUNE |    2971.6     |   164.78   |   34800    |      1     |
 | SUN     |    ------     |   ------   |  866400    |     --     |
 | MOON    |    ------     |   ------   |    2163    |     --     |
 |_________|_______________|____________|____________|____________|

FIG. 27]

[Illustration:

  ______________________________________
 |                                      |
 |            STAR DISTANCES            |
 |______________________________________|
 |                                      |
 |                         DISTANCE IN  |
 | STAR                    LIGHT-YEARS  |
 |                                      |
 | POLARIS                        76    |
 | CAPELLA                        49.4  |
 | RIGEL                         466    |
 | SIRIUS                          8.7  |
 | PROCYON                        10.5  |
 | REGULUS                        98.8  |
 | ARCTURUS                       43.4  |
 | [ALPHA] CENTAURI                4.29 |
 | VEGA                           34.7  |
 |______________________________________|
 |                                      |
 | SMALLER MAGELLANIC CLOUD   32,600[A] |
 | GREAT CLUSTER IN HERCULES 108,600[A] |
 |______________________________________|

[A] ESTIMATED

FIG. 28

The above distances are merely approximate and are subject to further
revision. A "light-year" is the distance that light, travelling at the
rate of 186,000 miles per second, would cover in one year.]

In this simple outline we have not touched on some of the more debatable
questions that engage the attention of modern astronomers. Many of these
questions have not yet passed the controversial stage; out of these will
emerge the astronomy of the future. But we have seen enough to convince
us that, whatever advances the future holds in store, the science of the
heavens constitutes one of the most important stones in the wonderful
fabric of human knowledge.


ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS

§ 1

The Telescope

The instruments used in modern astronomy are amongst the finest triumphs
of mechanical skill in the world. In a great modern observatory the
different instruments are to be counted by the score, but there are two
which stand out pre-eminent as the fundamental instruments of modern
astronomy. These instruments are the telescope and the spectroscope, and
without them astronomy, as we know it, could not exist.

There is still some dispute as to where and when the first telescope was
constructed; as an astronomical instrument, however, it dates from the
time of the great Italian scientist Galileo, who, with a very small and
imperfect telescope of his own invention, first observed the spots on
the sun, the mountains of the moon, and the chief four satellites of
Jupiter. A good pair of modern binoculars is superior to this early
instrument of Galileo's, and the history of telescope construction, from
that primitive instrument to the modern giant recently erected on Mount
Wilson, California, is an exciting chapter in human progress. But the
early instruments have only an historic interest: the era of modern
telescopes begins in the nineteenth century.

During the last century telescope construction underwent an
unprecedented development. An immense amount of interest was taken in
the construction of large telescopes, and the different countries of the
world entered on an exciting race to produce the most powerful possible
instruments. Besides this rivalry of different countries there was a
rivalry of methods. The telescope developed along two different lines,
and each of these two types has its partisans at the present day. These
types are known as _refractors_ and _reflectors_, and it is necessary to
mention, briefly, the principles employed in each. The _refractor_ is
the ordinary, familiar type of telescope. It consists, essentially, of a
large lens at one end of a tube, and a small lens, called the eye-piece,
at the other. The function of the large lens is to act as a sort of
gigantic eye. It collects a large amount of light, an amount
proportional to its size, and brings this light to a focus within the
tube of the telescope. It thus produces a small but bright image, and
the eye-piece magnifies this image. In the _reflector_, instead of a
large lens at the top of the tube, a large mirror is placed at the
bottom. This mirror is so shaped as to reflect the light that falls on
it to a focus, whence the light is again led to an eye-piece. Thus the
refractor and the reflector differ chiefly in their manner of gathering
light. The powerfulness of the telescope depends on the size of the
light-gatherer. A telescope with a lens four inches in diameter is four
times as powerful as the one with a lens two inches in diameter, for the
amount of light gathered obviously depends on the _area_ of the lens,
and the area varies as the _square_ of the diameter.

The largest telescopes at present in existence are _reflectors_. It is
much easier to construct a very large mirror than to construct a very
large lens; it is also cheaper. A mirror is more likely to get out of
order than is a lens, however, and any irregularity in the shape of a
mirror produces a greater distorting effect than in a lens. A refractor
is also more convenient to handle than is a reflector. For these reasons
great refractors are still made, but the largest of them, the great
Yerkes' refractor, is much smaller than the greatest reflector, the one
on Mount Wilson, California. The lens of the Yerkes' refractor measures
three feet four inches in diameter, whereas the Mount Wilson reflector
has a diameter of no less than eight feet four inches.

[Illustration: THE YERKES 40-INCH REFRACTOR

(The largest _refracting_ telescope in the world. Its big lens weighs
1,000 pounds, and its mammoth tube, which is 62 feet long, weighs about
12,000 pounds. The parts to be moved weigh approximately 22 tons.

The great _100-inch reflector_ of the Mount Wilson reflecting
telescope--the largest _reflecting_ instrument in the world--weighs
nearly 9,000 pounds and the moving parts of the telescope weigh about
100 tons.

The new _72-inch reflector_ at the Dominion Astrophysical Observatory,
near Victoria, B. C., weighs nearly 4,500 pounds, and the moving parts
about 35 tons.)]

[Illustration: _Photo: H. J. Shepstone._

THE DOUBLE-SLIDE PLATE HOLDER ON YERKES 40-INCH REFRACTING TELESCOPE

The smaller telescope at the top of the picture acts as a "finder"; the
field of view of the large telescope is so restricted that it is
difficult to recognise, as it were, the part of the heavens being
surveyed. The smaller telescope takes in a larger area and enables the
precise object to be examined to be easily selected.]

[Illustration: MODERN DIRECT-READING SPECTROSCOPE

(_By A. Hilger, Ltd._)

The light is brought through one telescope, is split up by the prism,
and the resulting spectrum is observed through the other telescope.]

But there is a device whereby the power of these giant instruments,
great as it is, can be still further heightened. That device is the
simple one of allowing the photographic plate to take the place of the
human eye. Nowadays an astronomer seldom spends the night with his eye
glued to the great telescope. He puts a photographic plate there. The
photographic plate has this advantage over the eye, that it builds up
impressions. However long we stare at an object too faint to be seen, we
shall never see it. With the photographic plate, however, faint
impressions go on accumulating. As hour after hour passes, the star
which was too faint to make a perceptible impression on the plate goes
on affecting it until finally it makes an impression which can be made
visible. In this way the photographic plate reveals to us phenomena in
the heavens which cannot be seen even through the most powerful
telescopes.

Telescopes of the kind we have been discussing, telescopes for exploring
the heavens, are mounted _equatorially_; that is to say, they are
mounted on an inclined pillar parallel to the axis of the earth so that,
by rotating round this pillar, the telescope is enabled to follow the
apparent motion of a star due to the rotation of the earth. This motion
is effected by clock-work, so that, once adjusted on a star, and the
clock-work started, the telescope remains adjusted on that star for any
length of time that is desired. But a great official observatory, such
as Greenwich Observatory or the Observatory at Paris, also has _transit_
instruments, or telescopes smaller than the equatorials and without the
same facility of movement, but which, by a number of exquisite
refinements, are more adapted to accurate measurements. It is these
instruments which are chiefly used in the compilation of the _Nautical
Almanac_. They do not follow the apparent motions of the stars. Stars
are allowed to drift across the field of vision, and as each star
crosses a small group of parallel wires in the eye-piece its precise
time of passage is recorded. Owing to their relative fixity of position
these instruments can be constructed to record the _positions_ of stars
with much greater accuracy than is possible to the more general and
flexible mounting of equatorials. The recording of transit is
comparatively dry work; the spectacular element is entirely absent;
stars are treated merely as mathematical points. But these observations
furnish the very basis of modern mathematical astronomy, and without
them such publications as the _Nautical Almanac_ and the _Connaissance
du Temps_ would be robbed of the greater part of their importance.


§ 2

The Spectroscope

We have already learnt something of the principles of the spectroscope,
the instrument which, by making it possible to learn the actual
constitution of the stars, has added a vast new domain to astronomy. In
the simplest form of this instrument the analysing portion consists of a
single prism. Unless the prism is very large, however, only a small
degree of dispersion is obtained. It is obviously desirable, for
accurate analytical work, that the dispersion--that is, the separation
of the different parts of the spectrum--should be as great as possible.
The dispersion can be increased by using a large number of prisms, the
light emerging from the first prism, entering the second, and so on. In
this way each prism produces its own dispersive effect and, when a
number of prisms are employed, the final dispersion is considerable. A
considerable amount of light is absorbed in this way, however, so that
unless our primary source of light is very strong, the final spectrum
will be very feeble and hard to decipher.

Another way of obtaining considerable dispersion is by using a
_diffraction grating_ instead of a prism. This consists essentially of a
piece of glass on which lines are ruled by a diamond point. When the
lines are sufficiently close together they split up light falling on
them into its constituents and produce a spectrum. The modern
diffraction grating is a truly wonderful piece of work. It contains
several thousands of lines to the inch, and these lines have to be
spaced with the greatest accuracy. But in this instrument, again, there
is a considerable loss of light.

We have said that every substance has its own distinctive spectrum, and
it might be thought that, when a list of the spectra of different
substances has been prepared, spectrum analysis would become perfectly
straightforward. In practice, however, things are not quite so simple.
The spectrum emitted by a substance is influenced by a variety of
conditions. The pressure, the temperature, the state of motion of the
object we are observing, all make a difference, and one of the most
laborious tasks of the modern spectroscopist is to disentangle these
effects from one another. Simple as it is in its broad outlines,
spectroscopy is, in reality, one of the most intricate branches of
modern science.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

(The following list of books may be useful to readers wishing to pursue
further the study of Astronomy.)

 BALL, _The Story of the Heavens_.
 BALL, _The Story of the Sun_.
 FORBES, _History of Astronomy_.
 HINCKS, _Astronomy_.
 KIPPAX, _Call of the Stars_.
 LOWELL, _Mars and Its Canals_.
 LOWELL, _Evolution of Worlds_.
 MCKREADY, _A Beginner's Star-Book_.
 NEWCOMB, _Popular Astronomy_.
 NEWCOMB, _The Stars: A Study of the Universe_.
 OLCOTT, _Field Book of the Stars_.
 PRICE, _Essence of Astronomy_.
 SERVISS, _Curiosities of the Skies_.
 WEBB, _Celestial Objects for Common Telescopes_.
 YOUNG, _Text-Book of General Astronomy_.

