§ 2

Instinctive Behaviour

On a higher level is instinctive behaviour, which reaches such
remarkable perfection in ants, bees, and wasps. In its typical
expression instinctive behaviour depends on inborn capacities; it does
not require to be learned; it is independent of practice or experience,
though it may be improved by both; it is shared equally by all members
of the species of the same sex (for the female's instincts are often
different from the male's); it refers to particular conditions of life
that are of vital importance, though they may occur only once in a
lifetime. The female Yucca Moth emerges from the cocoon when the Yucca
flower puts forth its bell-like blossoms. She flies to a flower,
collects some pollen from the stamens, kneads it into a pill-like ball,
and stows this away under her chin. She flies to an older Yucca flower
and lays her eggs in some of the ovules within the seed-box, but before
she does so she has to deposit on the stigma the ball of pollen. From
this the pollen-tubes grow down and the pollen-nucleus of a tube
fertilises the egg-cell in an ovule, so that the possible seeds become
real seeds, for it is only a fraction of them that the Yucca Moth has
destroyed by using them as cradles for her eggs. Now it is plain that
the Yucca Moth has no individual experience of Yucca flowers, yet she
secures the continuance of her race by a concatenation of actions which
form part of her instinctive repertory.

From a physiological point of view instinctive behaviour is like a chain
of compound reflex actions, but in some cases, at least, there is reason
to believe that the behaviour is suffused with awareness and backed by
endeavour. This is suggested in exceptional cases where the stereotyped
routine is departed from to meet exceptional conditions. It should also
be noted that just as ants, hive bees, and wasps exhibit in most cases
purely instinctive behaviour, but move on occasion on the main line of
trial and error or of experimental initiative, so among birds and
mammals the intelligent behaviour is sometimes replaced by instinctive
routine. Perhaps there is no instinctive behaviour without a spice of
intelligence, and no intelligent behaviour without an instinctive
element. The old view that instinctive behaviour was originally
intelligent, and that instinct is "lapsed intelligence," is a tempting
one, and is suggested by the way in which habitual intelligent actions
cease in the individual to require intelligent control, but it rests on
the unproved hypothesis that the acquisitions of the individual can be
entailed on the race. It is almost certain that instinct is on a line of
evolution quite different from intelligence, and that it is nearer to
the inborn inspirations of the calculating boy or the musical genius
than to the plodding methods of intelligent learning.


Animal Intelligence

The higher reaches of the inclined plane of behaviour show intelligence
in the strict sense. They include those kinds of behaviour which cannot
be described without the suggestion that the animal makes some sort of
perceptual inference, not only profiting by experience but learning by
ideas. Such intelligent actions show great individual variability; they
are plastic and adjustable in a manner rarely hinted at in connection
with instincts where routine cannot be departed from without the
creature being nonplussed; they are not bound up with particular
circumstances as instinctive actions are, but imply an appreciative
awareness of relations.

When there is an experimenting with general ideas, when there is
_conceptual_ as contrasted with _perceptual_ inference, we speak of
Reason, but there is no evidence of this below the level of man. It is
not, indeed, always that we can credit man with rational conduct, but he
has the possibility of it ever within his reach.

Animal instinct and intelligence will be illustrated in another part of
this work. We are here concerned simply with the general question of the
evolution of behaviour. There is a main line of tentative experimental
behaviour both below and above the level of intelligence, and it has
been part of the tactics of evolution to bring about the hereditary
enregistration of capacities of effective response, the advantages being
that the answers come more rapidly and that the creature is left free,
if it chooses, for higher adventures.

There is no doubt as to the big fact that in the course of evolution
animals have shown an increasing complexity and masterfulness of
behaviour, that they have become at once more controlled and more
definitely free agents, and that the inner aspect of the
behaviour--experimenting, learning, thinking, feeling, and willing--has
come to count for more and more.


§ 3

Evolution of Parental Care

Mammals furnish a crowning instance of a trend of evolution which
expresses itself at many levels--the tendency to bring forth the young
at a well-advanced stage and to an increase of parental care associated
with a decrease in the number of offspring. There is a British starfish
called _Luidia_ which has two hundred millions of eggs in a year, and
there are said to be several millions of eggs in conger-eels and some
other fishes. These illustrate the spawning method of solving the
problem of survival. Some animals are naturally prolific, and the number
of eggs which they sow broadcast in the waters allows for enormous
infantile mortality and obviates any necessity for parental care.

But some other creatures, by nature less prolific, have found an
entirely different solution of the problem. They practise parental care
and they secure survival with greatly economised reproduction. This is a
trend of evolution particularly characteristic of the higher animals. So
much so that Herbert Spencer formulated the generalisation that the size
and frequency of the animal family is inverse ratio to the degree of
evolution to which the animal has attained.

Now there are many different methods of parental care which secure the
safety of the young, and one of these is called viviparity. The young
ones are not liberated from the parent until they are relatively well
advanced and more or less able to look after themselves. This gives the
young a good send-off in life, and their chances of death are greatly
reduced. In other words, the animals that have varied in the direction
of economised reproduction may keep their foothold in the struggle for
existence if they have varied at the same time in the direction of
parental care. In other cases it may have worked the other way round.

In the interesting archaic animal called _Peripatus_, which has to face
a modern world too severe for it, one of the methods of meeting the
environing difficulties is the retention of the offspring for many
months within the mother, so that it is born a fully-formed creature.
There are only a few offspring at a time, and, although there are
exceptional cases like the summer green-flies, which are very prolific
though viviparous, the general rule is that viviparity is associated
with a very small family. The case of flowering plants stands by itself,
for although they illustrate a kind of viviparity, the seed being
embryos, an individual plant may have a large number of flowers and
therefore a huge family.

Viviparity naturally finds its best illustrations among terrestrial
animals, where the risks to the young life are many, and it finds its
climax among mammals.

Now it is an interesting fact that the three lowest mammals, the
Duckmole and two Spiny Ant-eaters, lay eggs, i.e. are oviparous; that
the Marsupials, on the next grade, bring forth their young, as it were,
prematurely, and in most cases stow them away in an external pouch;
while all the others--the Placentals--show a more prolonged ante-natal
life and an intimate partnership between the mother and the unborn
young.


§ 4

There is another way of looking at the sublime process of evolution. It
has implied a mastery of all the possible haunts of life; it has been a
progressive conquest of the environment.

1. It is highly probable that living organisms found their foothold in
the stimulating conditions of the shore of the sea--the shallow water,
brightly illumined, seaweed-growing shelf fringing the Continents. This
littoral zone was a propitious environment where sea and fresh water,
earth and air all meet, where there is stimulating change, abundant
oxygenation and a copious supply of nutritive material in what the
streams bring down and in the rich seaweed vegetation.

[Illustration: THE HOATZIN INHABITS BRITISH GUIANA

The newly hatched bird has claws on its thumb and first finger and so is
enabled to climb on the branches of trees with great dexterity until
such time as the wings are strong enough to sustain it in flight.]

[Illustration: _Photograph, from the British Museum (Natural History),
of a drawing by Mr. E. Wilson._

PERIPATUS

A widely distributed old-fashioned type of animal, somewhat like a
permanent caterpillar. It has affinities both with worms and with
insects. It has a velvety skin, minute diamond-like eyes, and short
stump-like legs. A defenceless, weaponless animal, it comes out at
night, and is said to capture small insects by squirting jets of slime
from its mouth.]

[Illustration: _Photo: W. S. Berridge, F.Z.S._

ROCK KANGAROO CARRYING ITS YOUNG IN A POUCH

The young are born so helpless that they cannot even suck. The mother
places them in the external pouch, and fitting their mouths on the teats
injects the milk. After a time the young ones go out and in as they
please.]

It is not an easy haunt of life, but none the worse for that, and it is
tenanted to-day by representatives of practically every class of animals
from infusorians to seashore birds and mammals.


The Cradle of the Open Sea

2. The open-sea or pelagic haunt includes all the brightly illumined
surface waters beyond the shallow water of the shore area.

It is perhaps the easiest of all the haunts of life, for there is no
crowding, there is considerable uniformity, and an abundance of food for
animals is afforded by the inexhaustible floating "sea-meadows" of
microscopic Algæ. These are reincarnated in minute animals like the
open-sea crustaceans, which again are utilised by fishes, these in turn
making life possible for higher forms like carnivorous turtles and
toothed whales. It is quite possible that the open sea was the original
cradle of life and perhaps Professor Church is right in picturing a long
period of pelagic life before there was any sufficiently shallow water
to allow the floating plants to anchor. It is rather in favour of this
view that many shore animals such as crabs and starfishes, spend their
youthful stages in the relatively safe cradle of the open sea, and only
return to the more strenuous conditions of their birthplace after they
have gained considerable strength of body. It is probably safe to say
that the honour of being the original cradle of life lies between the
shore of the sea and the open sea.


The Great Deeps

3. A third haunt of life is the floor of the Deep Sea, the abyssal area,
which occupies more than a half of the surface of the globe. It is a
region of extreme cold--an eternal winter; of utter darkness--an eternal
night--relieved only by the fitful gleams of "phosphorescent" animals;
of enormous pressure--2-1/2 tons on the square inch at a depth of 2,500
fathoms; of profound calm, unbroken silence, immense monotony. And as
there are no plants in the great abysses, the animals must live on one
another, and, in the long run, on the rain of moribund animalcules which
sink from the surface through the miles of water. It seems a very
unpromising haunt of life, but it is abundantly tenanted, and it gives
us a glimpse of the insurgent nature of the living creature that the
difficulties of the Deep Sea should have been so effectively conquered.
It is probable that the colonising of the great abysses took place in
relatively recent times, for the fauna does not include many very
antique types. It is practically certain that the colonisation was due
to littoral animals which followed the food-débris, millennium after
millennium, further and further down the long slope from the shore.


The Freshwaters

4. A fourth haunt of life is that of the freshwaters, including river
and lake, pond and pool, swamp and marsh. It may have been colonised by
gradual migration up estuaries and rivers, or by more direct passage
from the seashore into the brackish swamp. Or it may have been in some
cases that partially landlocked corners of ancient seas became gradually
turned into freshwater basins. The animal population of the freshwaters
is very representative, and is diversely adapted to meet the
characteristic contingencies--the risk of being dried up, the risk of
being frozen hard in winter, and the risk of being left high and dry
after floods or of being swept down to the sea.


Conquest of the Dry Land

5. The terrestrial haunt has been invaded age after age by contingents
from the sea or from the freshwaters. We must recognise the worm
invasion, which led eventually to the making of the fertile soil, the
invasion due to air-breathing Arthropods, which led eventually to the
important linkage between flowers and their insect visitors, and the
invasion due to air-breathing Amphibians, which led eventually to the
higher terrestrial animals and to the development of intelligence and
family affection. Besides these three great invasions, there were minor
ones such as that leading to land-snails, for there has been a
widespread and persistent tendency among aquatic animals to try to
possess the dry land.

Getting on to dry land had a manifold significance.

It implied getting into a medium with a much larger supply of oxygen
than there is dissolved in the water. But the oxygen of the air is more
difficult to capture, especially when the skin becomes hard or well
protected, as it is almost bound to become in animals living on dry
ground. Thus this leads to the development of _internal surfaces_, such
as those of lungs, where the oxygen taken into the body may be absorbed
by the blood. In most animals the blood goes to the surface of
oxygen-capture; but in insects and their relatives there is a different
idea--of taking the air to the blood or in greater part to the area of
oxygen-combustion, the living tissues. A system of branching air-tubes
takes air into every hole and corner of the insect's body, and this
thorough aeration is doubtless in part the secret of the insect's
intense activity. The blood never becomes impure.

The conquest of the dry land also implied a predominance of that kind of
locomotion which may be compared to punting, when the body is pushed
along by pressing a lever against a hard substratum. And it also
followed that with few exceptions the body of the terrestrial animal
tended to be compact, readily lifted off the ground by the limbs or
adjusted in some other way so that there may not be too large a surface
trailing on the ground. An animal like a jellyfish, easily supported in
the water, would be impossible on land. Such apparent exceptions as
earthworms, centipedes, and snakes are not difficult to explain, for the
earthworm is a burrower which eats its way through the soil, the
centipede's long body is supported by numerous hard legs, and the snake
pushes itself along by means of the large ventral scales to which the
lower ends of very numerous ribs are attached.


Methods of Mastering the Difficulties of Terrestrial Life

A great restriction attendant on the invasion of the dry land is that
locomotion becomes limited to one plane, namely, the surface of the
earth. This is in great contrast to what is true in the water, where the
animal can move up or down, to right or to left, at any angle and in
three dimensions. It surely follows from this that the movements of land
animals must be rapid and precise, unless, indeed, safety is secured in
some other way. Hence it is easy to understand why most land animals
have very finely developed striped muscles, and why a beetle running on
the ground has far more numerous muscles than a lobster swimming in the
sea.

Land animals were also handicapped by the risks of drought and of frost,
but these were met by defences of the most diverse description, from the
hairs of woolly caterpillars to the fur of mammals, from the carapace of
tortoises to the armour of armadillos. In other cases, it is hardly
necessary to say, the difficulties may be met in other ways, as frogs
meet the winter by falling into a lethargic state in some secluded
retreat.

Another consequence of getting on to dry land is that the eggs or young
can no longer be set free anyhow, as is possible when the animal is
surrounded by water, which is in itself more or less of a cradle. If the
eggs were laid or the young liberated on dry ground, the chances are
many that they would be dried up or devoured. So there are numerous ways
in which land animals secure the safety of their young, e.g. by burying
them in the ground, or by hiding them in nests, or by carrying them
about for a prolonged period either before or after birth. This may mean
great safety for the young, this may make it possible to have only a
small family, and this may tend to the evolution of parental care and
the kindly emotions. Thus it may be understood that from the conquest of
the land many far-reaching consequences have followed.

[Illustration: _Photo: Rischgitz._

PROFESSOR THOMAS HENRY HUXLEY (1825-95)

One of the most distinguished of zoologists, with unsurpassed gifts as a
teacher and expositor. He did great service in gaining a place for
science in ordinary education and in popular estimation. No one
championed Evolutionism with more courage and skill.]

[Illustration: BARON CUVIER, 1769-1832

One of the founders of modern Comparative Anatomy. A man of gigantic
intellect, who came to Paris as a youth from the provinces, and became
the director of the higher education of France and a peer of the Empire.
He was opposed to Evolutionist ideas, but he had anatomical genius.]

[Illustration: AN ILLUSTRATION SHOWING VARIOUS METHODS OF FLYING AND
SWOOPING

Gull, with a feather-wing, a true flier. Fox-bat, with a skin-wing, a
true flier. Flying Squirrel, with a parachute of skin, able to swoop
from tree to tree, but not to fly. Flying Fish, with pectoral fins used
as volplanes in a great leap due to the tail. To some extent able to
sail in albatros fashion.]

Finally, it is worth dwelling on the risks of terrestrial life, because
they enable us better to understand why so many land animals have become
burrowers and others climbers of trees, why some have returned to the
water and others have taken to the air. It may be asked, perhaps, why
the land should have been colonised at all when the risks and
difficulties are so great. The answer must be that necessity and
curiosity are the mother and father of invention. Animals left the water
because the pools dried up, or because they were overcrowded, or because
of inveterate enemies, but also because of that curiosity and spirit of
adventure which, from first to last, has been one of the spurs of
progress.


Conquering the Air

6. The last great haunt of life is the air, a mastery of which must be
placed to the credit of insects, Pterodactyls, birds, and bats. These
have been the successes, but it should be noted that there have been
many brilliant failures, which have not attained to much more than
parachuting. These include the Flying Fishes, which take leaps from the
water and are carried for many yards and to considerable heights,
holding their enlarged pectoral fins taut or with little more than a
slight fluttering. There is a so-called Flying Frog (_Rhacophorus_) that
skims from branch to branch, and the much more effective Flying Dragon
(_Draco volans_) of the Far East, which has been mentioned already.
Among mammals there are Flying Phalangers, Flying Lemurs, and more
besides, all attaining to great skill as parachutists, and illustrating
the endeavour to master the air which man has realised in a way of his
own.

The power of flight brings obvious advantages. A bird feeding on the
ground is able to evade the stalking carnivore by suddenly rising into
the air; food and water can be followed rapidly and to great distances;
the eggs or the young can be placed in safe situations; and birds in
their migrations have made a brilliant conquest both of time and space.
Many of them know no winter in their year, and the migratory flight of
the Pacific Golden Plover from Hawaii to Alaska and back again does not
stand alone.


THE PROCESSION OF LIFE THROUGH THE AGES

§ 1

The Rock Record

How do we know when the various classes of animals and plants were
established on the earth? How do we know the order of their appearance
and the succession of their advances? The answer is: by reading the Rock
Record. In the course of time the crust of the earth has been elevated
into continents and depressed into ocean-troughs, and the surface of the
land has been buckled up into mountain ranges and folded in gentler
hills and valleys. The high places of the land have been weathered by
air and water in many forms, and the results of the weathering have been
borne away by rivers and seas, to be laid down again elsewhere as
deposits which eventually formed sandstones, mudstones, and similar
sedimentary rocks. Much of the material of the original crust has thus
been broken down and worked up again many times over, and if the total
thickness of the sedimentary rocks is added up it amounts, according to
some geologists, to a total of 67 miles. In most cases, however, only a
small part of this thickness is to be seen in one place, for the
deposits were usually formed in limited areas at any one time.


The Use of Fossils

When the sediments were accumulating age after age, it naturally came
about that remains of the plants and animals living at the time were
buried, and these formed the fossils by the aid of which it is possible
to read the story of the past. By careful piecing together of evidence
the geologist is able to determine the order in which the different
sedimentary rocks were laid down, and thus to say, for instance, that
the Devonian period was the time of the origin of Amphibians. In other
cases the geologist utilises the fossils in his attempt to work out the
order of the strata when these have been much disarranged. For the
simpler fossil forms of any type must be older than those that are more
complex. There is no vicious circle here, for the general succession of
strata is clear, and it is quite certain that there were fishes before
there were amphibians, and amphibians before there were reptiles, and
reptiles before there were birds and mammals. In certain cases, e.g. of
fossil horses and elephants, the actual historical succession has been
clearly worked out.

If the successive strata contained good samples of all the plants and
animals living at the time when the beds were formed, then it would be
easy to read the record of the rocks, but many animals were too soft to
become satisfactory fossils, many were eaten or dissolved away, many
were destroyed by heat and pressure, so that the rock record is like a
library very much damaged by fire and looting and decay.


§ 2

The Geological Time-table

The long history of the earth and its inhabitants is conveniently
divided into eras. Thus, just as we speak of the ancient, mediæval, and
modern history of mankind, so we may speak of Palæozoic, Mesozoic and
Cenozoic eras in the history of the earth as a whole.

Geologists cannot tell us except in an approximate way how long the
process of evolution has taken. One of the methods is to estimate how
long has been required for the accumulation of the salts of the sea,
for all these have been dissolved out of the rocks since rain began to
fall on the earth. Dividing the total amount of saline matter by what is
contributed every year in modern times, we get about a hundred million
years as the age of the sea. But as the present rate of
salt-accumulation is probably much greater than it was during many of
the geological periods, the prodigious age just mentioned is in all
likelihood far below the mark. Another method is to calculate how long
it would take to form the sedimentary rocks, like sandstones and
mudstones, which have a _total_ thickness of over fifty miles, though
the _local_ thickness is rarely over a mile. As most of the materials
have come from the weathering of the earth's crust, and as the annual
amount of weathering now going on can be estimated, the time required
for the formation of the sedimentary rocks of the world can be
approximately calculated. There are some other ways of trying to tell
the earth's age and the length of the successive periods, but no
certainty has been reached.

The eras marked on the table (page 92) as _before the Cambrian_
correspond to about thirty-two miles of thickness of strata; and all the
subsequent eras with fossil-bearing rocks to a thickness of about
twenty-one miles--in itself an astounding fact. Perhaps thirty million
years must be allotted to the Pre-Cambrian eras, eighteen to the
Palæozoic, nine to the Mesozoic, three to the Cenozoic, making a grand
total of sixty millions.


The Establishment of Invertebrate Stocks

It is an astounding fact that at least half of geological time (the
Archæozoic and Proterozoic eras) passed before there were living
creatures with parts sufficiently hard to form fossils. In the latter
part of the Proterozoic era there are traces of one-celled marine
animals (Radiolarians) with shells of flint, and of worms that wallowed
in the primal mud. It is plain that as regards the most primitive
creatures the rock record tells us little.

[Illustration: _From Knipe's "Nebula to Man."_

ANIMALS OF THE CAMBRIAN PERIOD e.g. Sponges, Jellyfish, Starfish,
Sea-lilies, Water-fleas, and Trilobites]

[Illustration: _Photo: J. J. Ward, F.E.S._

A TRILOBITE

Trilobites were ancient seashore animals, abundant from the Upper
Cambrian to the Carboniferous eras. They have no direct descendants
to-day. They were jointed-footed animals, allied to Crustaceans and
perhaps also to King-crabs. They were able to roll themselves up in
their ring-armour.]

[Illustration: _Photo: British Museum (Natural History)._

THE GAMBIAN MUD-FISH, PROTOPTERUS

It can breathe oxygen dissolved in water by its gills; it can also
breathe dry air by means of its swim-bladder, which has become a lung.
It is a _double-breather_, showing evolution in process. For seven
months of the year, the dry season, it can remain inert in the mud,
getting air through an open pipe to the surface. When water fills the
pools it can use its gills again. Mud-nests or mud encasements with the
lung-fish inside have often been brought to Britain and the fish when
liberated were quite lively.]

[Illustration: THE ARCHÆOPTERYX

(_After William Leche of Stockholm._)

A good restoration of the oldest known bird, Archæopteryx (Jurassic
Era). It was about the size of a crow; it had teeth on both jaws; it had
claws on the thumb and two fingers; and it had a long lizard-like tail.
But it had feathers, proving itself a true bird.]

[Illustration: WING OF A BIRD, SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE FEATHERS

The longest feathers or primaries (PR) are borne by the two fingers (2
and 3), and their palm-bones (CMC); the second longest or secondaries
are borne by the ulna bone (U) of the fore-arm; there is a separate tuft
(AS) on the thumb (TH).]

The rarity of direct traces of life in the oldest rocks is partly due to
the fact that the primitive animals would be of delicate build, but it
must also be remembered that the ancient rocks have been profoundly and
repeatedly changed by pressure and heat, so that the traces which did
exist would be very liable to obliteration. And if it be asked what
right we have to suppose the presence of living creatures in the absence
or extreme rarity of fossils, we must point to great accumulations of
limestone which indicate the existence of calcareous algæ, and to
deposits of iron which probably indicate the activity of iron-forming
Bacteria. Ancient beds of graphite similarly suggest that green plants
flourished in these ancient days.


§ 3

The Era of Ancient Life (Palæozoic)

The _Cambrian_ period was the time of the establishment of the chief
stocks of backboneless animals such as sponges, jellyfishes, worms,
sea-cucumbers, lamp-shells, trilobites, crustaceans, and molluscs. There
is something very eloquent in the broad fact that the peopling of the
seas had definitely begun some thirty million years ago, for Professor
H. F. Osborn points out that in the Cambrian period there was already a
colonisation of the shore of the sea, the open sea, and the deep waters.

The _Ordovician_ period was marked by abundant representation of the
once very successful class of Trilobites--jointed-footed,
antenna-bearing, segmented marine animals, with numerous appendages and
a covering of chitin. They died away entirely with the end of the
Palæozoic era. Also very notable was the abundance of predatory
cuttlefishes, the bullies of the ancient seas. But it was in this period
that the first backboned animals made their appearance--an epoch-making
step in evolution. In other words, true fishes were evolved--destined in
the course of ages to replace the cuttlefishes (which are mere molluscs)
in dominating the seas.

 _______________________________________________________________________

 _RECENT TIMES_                            Human civilisation.
 _______________________________________________________________________

                      {PLEISTOCENE OR GLACIAL TIME Last great Ice Age.
 _CENOZOIC ERA_       {MIOCENE AND PLIOCENE TIMES  Emergence of Man.
                      {EOCENE AND OLIGOCENE TIMES  Rise of higher mammals.
 _______________________________________________________________________

                      {CRETACEOUS PERIOD    Rise of primitive mammals,
                      {                      flowering plants,
                      {                      and higher insects.
 _MESOZOIC ERA_       {JURASSIC PERIOD      Rise of birds and flying
                      {                      reptiles.
                      {TRIASSIC PERIOD      Rise of dinosaur reptiles.
 _______________________________________________________________________

                      {PERMIAN PERIOD       Rise of reptiles.
                      {CARBONIFEROUS PERIOD Rise of insects.
                      {DEVONIAN PERIOD      First amphibians.
 _PALÆOZOIC ERA_      {SILURIAN PERIOD      Land animals began.
                      {ORDOVICIAN PERIOD    First fishes.
                      {CAMBRIAN PERIOD      Peopling of the sea.
 _______________________________________________________________________

 _PROTEROZOIC AGES_   Many of the Backboneless stocks began.
 _ARCHÆOZOIC AGES_    Living creatures began to be upon the earth.
 _______________________________________________________________________

                      {Making of continents and ocean-basins.
                      {Beginnings of atmosphere and hydrosphere.
 _FORMATIVE TIMES_    {Cooling of the earth.
                      {Establishment of the solar system.
 _______________________________________________________________________

In the _Silurian_ period in which the peopling of the seas went on
apace, there was the first known attempt at colonising the dry land. For
in Silurian rocks there are fossil scorpions, and that implies ability
to breathe dry air--by means of internal surfaces, in this case known as
lungbooks. It was also towards the end of the Silurian, when a period of
great aridity set in, that fishes appeared related to our mud-fishes or
double-breathers (Dipnoi), which have lungs as well as gills. This,
again, meant utilising dry air, just as the present-day mud-fishes do
when the water disappears from the pools in hot weather. The lung-fishes
or mud-fishes of to-day are but three in number, one in Queensland, one
in South America, and one in Africa, but they are extremely
interesting "living fossils," binding the class of fishes to that of
amphibians. It is highly probable that the first invasion of the dry
land should be put to the credit of some adventurous worms, but the
second great invasion was certainly due to air-breathing Arthropods,
like the pioneer scorpion we mentioned.

[Illustration: PICTORIAL REPRESENTATION OF THE SUCCESSIVE STRATA OF THE
EARTH'S CRUST, WITH SUGGESTIONS OF CHARACTERISTIC FOSSILS

E.g. Fish and Trilobite in the Devonian (red), a large Amphibian in the
Carboniferous (blue), Reptiles in Permian (light red), the first Mammal
in the Triassic (blue), the first Bird in the Jurassic (yellow), Giant
Reptiles in the Cretaceous (white), then follow the Tertiary strata with
progressive mammals, and Quaternary at the top with man and mammoth.]

The _Devonian_ period, including that of the Old Red Sandstone, was one
of the most significant periods in the earth's history. For it was the
time of the establishment of flowering plants upon the earth and of
terrestrial backboned animals. One would like to have been the
discoverer of the Devonian foot-print of _Thinopus_, the first known
Amphibian foot-print--an eloquent vestige of the third great invasion of
the dry land. It was probably from a stock of Devonian lung-fishes that
the first Amphibians sprang, but it was not till the next period that
they came to their own. While they were still feeling their way, there
was a remarkable exuberance of shark-like and heavily armoured fishes in
the Devonian seas.


EVOLUTION OF LAND ANIMALS

§ 1

Giant Amphibians and Coal-measures

The _Carboniferous_ period was marked by a mild moist climate and a
luxuriant vegetation in the swampy low grounds. It was a much less
strenuous time than the Devonian period; it was like a very long summer.
There were no trees of the type we see now, but there were forests of
club-mosses and horsetails which grew to a gigantic size compared with
their pigmy representatives of to-day. In these forests the
jointed-footed invaders of the dry land ran riot in the form of
centipedes, spiders, scorpions, and insects, and on these the primeval
Amphibians fed. The appearance of insects made possible a new linkage of
far-reaching importance, namely, the cross-fertilisation of flowering
plants by their insect visitors, and from this time onwards it may be
said that flowers and their visitors have evolved hand in hand.
Cross-fertilisation is much surer by insects than by the wind, and
cross-fertilisation is more advantageous than self-fertilisation because
it promotes both fertility and plasticity. It was probably in this
period that _coloured_ flowers--attractive to insect-visitors--began to
justify themselves as beauty became useful, and began to relieve the
monotonous green of the horsetail and club-moss forests, which covered
great tracts of the earth for millions of years. In the Carboniferous
forests there were also land-snails, representing one of the minor
invasions of the dry land, tending on the whole to check vegetation.
They, too, were probably preyed upon by the Amphibians, some of which
attained a large size. Each age has had its giants, and those of the
Carboniferous were Amphibians called Labyrinthodonts, some of which were
almost as big as donkeys. It need hardly be said that it was in this
period that most of the Coal-measures were laid down by the immense
accumulation of the spores and debris of the club-moss forests. Ages
afterwards, it was given to man to tap this great source of
energy--traceable back to the sunshine of millions of years ago. Even
then it was true that no plant or animal lives or dies to itself!


The Acquisitions of Amphibians.

As Amphibians had their Golden Age in the Carboniferous period we may
fitly use this opportunity of indicating the advances in evolution which
the emergence of Amphibians implied. (1) In the first place the passage
from water to dry land was the beginning of a higher and more promiseful
life, taxed no doubt by increased difficulties. The natural question
rises why animals should have migrated from water to dry land at all
when great difficulties were involved in the transition. The answers
must be: (_a_) that local drying up of water-basins or elevations of the
land surface often made the old haunts untenable; (_b_) that there may
have been great congestion and competition in the old quarters; and
(_c_) that there has been an undeniable endeavour after well-being
throughout the history of animal life. In the same way with mankind,
migrations were prompted by the setting in of prolonged drought, by
over-population, and by the spirit of adventure. (2) In Amphibians for
the first time the non-digitate paired fins of fishes were replaced by
limbs with fingers and toes. This implied an advantageous power of
grasping, of holding firm, of putting food into the mouth, of feeling
things in three dimensions. (3) We cannot be positive in regard to the
soft parts of the ancient Amphibians known only as fossils, but if they
were in a general way like the frogs and toads, newts and salamanders of
the present day, we may say that they made among other acquisitions the
following: true ventral lungs, a three-chambered heart, a movable
tongue, a drum to the ear, and lids to the eyes. It is very interesting
to find that though the tongue of the tadpole has some muscle-fibres in
it, they are not strong enough to effect movement, recalling the tongue
of fishes, which has not any muscles at all. Gradually, as the tadpole
becomes a frog, the muscle-fibres grow in strength, and make it possible
for the full-grown creature to shoot out its tongue upon insects. This
is probably a recapitulation of what was accomplished in the course of
millennia in the history of the Amphibian race. (4) Another acquisition
made by Amphibians was a voice, due, as in ourselves, to the rapid
passage of air over taut membranes (vocal cords) stretched in the
larynx. It is an interesting fact that for millions of years there was
upon the earth no sound of life at all, only the noise of wind and wave,
thunder and avalanche. Apart from the instrumental music of some
insects, perhaps beginning in the Carboniferous, the first vital sounds
were due to Amphibians, and theirs certainly was the first voice--surely
one of the great steps in organic evolution.

[Illustration: _Photo: British Museum (Natural History)._

FOSSIL OF A PTERODACTYL OR EXTINCT FLYING DRAGON

The wing is made of a web of skin extended on the enormously elongated
outermost finger. The long tail served for balancing and steering. The
Pterodactyls varied from the size of sparrows to a wing-span of fifteen
feet--the largest flying creatures.]

[Illustration: _From Knipe's "Nebula to Man."_

PARIASAURUS: AN EXTINCT VEGETARIAN TRIASSIC REPTILE

Total length about 9 feet. (Remains found in Cape Colony, South
Africa.)]

[Illustration: _From Knipe's "Nebula to Man."_

TRICERATOPS: A HUGE EXTINCT REPTILE

(From remains found in Cretaceous strata of Wyoming, U.S.A.)

This Dinosaur, about the size of a large rhinoceros, had a huge
three-horned skull with a remarkable bony collar over the neck. But, as
in many other cases, its brain was so small that it could have passed
down the spinal canal in which the spinal cord lies. Perhaps this partly
accounts for the extinction of giant reptiles.]

[Illustration: _Photo: "Daily Mail."_

THE DUCKMOLE OR DUCK-BILLED PLATYPUS OF AUSTRALIA

The Duckmole or Duck-billed Platypus of Australia is a survivor of the
most primitive mammals. It harks back to reptiles, e.g. in being an
egg-layer, in having comparatively large eggs, and in being imperfectly
warm-blooded. It swims well and feeds on small water-animals. It can
also burrow.]


Evolution of the Voice

The first use of the voice was probably that indicated by our frogs and
toads--it serves as a sex-call. That is the meaning of the trumpeting
with which frogs herald the spring, and it is often only in the males
that the voice is well developed. But if we look forward, past
Amphibians altogether, we find the voice becoming a maternal call
helping to secure the safety of the young--a use very obvious when young
birds squat motionless at the sound of the parent's danger-note. Later
on, probably, the voice became an infantile call, as when the unhatched
crocodile pipes from within the deeply buried egg, signalling to the
mother that it is time to be unearthed. Higher still the voice expresses
emotion, as in the song of birds, often outside the limits of the
breeding time. Later still, particular sounds become words, signifying
particular things or feelings, such as "food," "danger," "home,"
"anger," and "joy." Finally words become a medium of social intercourse
and as symbols help to make it possible for man to reason.


§ 2

The Early Reptiles

In the _Permian_ period reptiles appeared, or perhaps one should say,
began to assert themselves. That is to say, there was an emergence of
backboned animals which were free from water and relinquished the method
of breathing by gills, which Amphibians retained in their young stages
at least. The unhatched or unborn reptile breathes by means of a
vascular hood spread underneath the egg-shell and absorbing dry air from
without. It is an interesting point that this vascular hood, called the
allantois, is represented in the Amphibians by an unimportant bladder
growing out from the hind end of the food-canal. A great step in
evolution was implied in the origin of this ante-natal hood or foetal
membrane and another one--of protective significance--called the amnion,
which forms a water-bag over the delicate embryo. The step meant total
emancipation from the water and from gill-breathing, and the two
foetal membranes, the amnion and the allantois, persist not only in
all reptiles but in birds and mammals as well. These higher Vertebrates
are therefore called Amniota in contrast to the Lower Vertebrates or
Anamnia (the Amphibians, Fishes, and primitive types).

It is a suggestive fact that the embryos of all reptiles, birds, and
mammals show gill-clefts--_a tell-tale evidence of their distant aquatic
ancestry_. But these embryonic gill-clefts are not used for respiration
and show no trace of gills except in a few embryonic reptiles and birds
where their dwindled vestiges have been recently discovered. As to the
gill-clefts, they are of no use in higher Vertebrates except that the
first becomes the Eustachian tube leading from the ear-passage to the
back of the mouth. The reason why they persist when only one is of any
use, and that in a transformed guise, would be difficult to interpret
except in terms of the Evolution theory. They illustrate the lingering
influence of a long pedigree, the living hand of the past, the tendency
that individual development has to recapitulate racial evolution. In a
condensed and telescoped manner, of course, for what took the race a
million years may be recapitulated by the individual in a week!

In the Permian period the warm moist climate of most of the
Carboniferous period was replaced by severe conditions, culminating in
an Ice Age which spread from the Southern Hemisphere throughout the
world. With this was associated a waning of the Carboniferous flora, and
the appearance of a new one, consisting of ferns, conifers, ginkgos, and
cycads, which persisted until near the end of the Mesozoic era. The
Permian Ice Age lasted for millions of years, and was most severe in the
Far South. Of course, it was a very different world then, for North
Europe was joined to North America, Africa to South America, and
Australia to Asia. It was probably during the Permian Ice Age that many
of the insects divided their life-history into two main chapters--the
feeding, growing, moulting, immature, larval stages, e.g. caterpillars,
and the more ascetic, non-growing, non-moulting, winged phase, adapted
for reproduction. Between these there intervened the quiescent,
well-protected pupa stage or chrysalis, probably adapted to begin with
as a means of surviving the severe winter. For it is easier for an
animal to survive when the vital processes are more or less in abeyance.


Disappearance of many Ancient Types

We cannot leave the last period of the Palæozoic era and its prolonged
ice age without noticing that it meant the entire cessation of a large
number of ancient types, especially among plants and backboneless
animals, which now disappear for ever. It is necessary to understand
that the animals of ancient days stand in three different relations to
those of to-day. (_a_) There are ancient types that have living
representatives, sometimes few and sometimes many, sometimes much
changed and sometimes but slightly changed. The lamp-shell,
_Lingulella_, of the Cambrian and Ordovician period has a very near
relative in the _Lingula_ of to-day. There are a few extremely
conservative animals. (_b_) There are ancient types which have no living
representatives, except in the guise of transformed descendants, as the
King-crab (_Limulus_) may be said to be a transformed descendant of the
otherwise quite extinct race to which Eurypterids or Sea-scorpions
belonged. (_c_) There are altogether extinct types--_lost races_--which
have left not a wrack behind. For there is not any representation to-day
of such races as Graptolites and Trilobites.

Looking backwards over the many millions of years comprised in the
Palæozoic era, what may we emphasise as the most salient features? There
was in the _Cambrian_ the establishment of the chief classes of
backboneless animals; in the _Ordovician_ the first fishes and perhaps
the first terrestrial plants; in the _Silurian_ the emergence of
air-breathing Invertebrates and mud-fishes; in the _Devonian_ the
appearance of the first Amphibians, from which all higher land animals
are descended, and the establishment of a land flora; in the
_Carboniferous_ the great Club-moss forests and an exuberance of
air-breathing insects and their allies; in the _Permian_ the first
reptiles and a new flora.


THE GEOLOGICAL MIDDLE AGES

§ 1

The Mesozoic Era

In a broad way the Mesozoic era corresponds with the Golden Age of
reptiles, and with the climax of the Conifer and Cycad flora, which was
established in the Permian. But among the Conifers and Cycads our modern
flowering plants were beginning to show face tentatively, just like
birds and mammals among the great reptiles.

In the _Triassic_ period the exuberance of reptilian life which marked
the Permian was continued. Besides Turtles which still persist, there
were Ichthyosaurs, Plesiosaurs, Dinosaurs, and Pterosaurs, none of which
lasted beyond the Mesozoic era. Of great importance was the rise of the
Dinosaurs in the Triassic, for it is highly probable that within the
limits of this vigorous and plastic stock--some of them bipeds--we must
look for the ancestors of both birds and mammals. Both land and water
were dominated by reptiles, some of which attained to gigantic size. Had
there been any zoologist in those days, he would have been very
sagacious indeed if he had suspected that reptiles did not represent the
climax of creation.


The Flying Dragons

The _Jurassic_ period showed a continuance of the reptilian splendour.
They radiated in many directions, becoming adapted to many haunts. Thus
there were many Fish Lizards paddling in the seas, many types of
terrestrial dragons stalking about on land, many swiftly gliding
alligator-like forms, and the Flying Dragons which began in the Triassic
attained to remarkable success and variety. Their wing was formed by the
extension of a great fold of skin on the enormously elongated outermost
finger, and they varied from the size of a sparrow to a spread of over
five feet. A soldering of the dorsal vertebræ as in our Flying Birds was
an adaptation to striking the air with some force, but as there is not
more than a slight keel, if any, on the breast-bone, it is unlikely that
they could fly far. For we know from our modern birds that the power of
flight may be to some extent gauged from the degree of development of
the keel, which is simply a great ridge for the better insertion of the
muscles of flight. It is absent, of course, in the Running Birds, like
the ostrich, and it has degenerated in an interesting way in the
burrowing parrot (_Stringops_) and a few other birds that have "gone
back."


The First Known Bird

But the Jurassic is particularly memorable because its strata have
yielded two fine specimens of the first known bird, _Archæopteryx_.
These were entombed in the deposits which formed the fine-grained
lithographic stones of Bavaria, and practically every bone in the body
is preserved except the breast-bone. Even the feathers have left their
marks with distinctness. This oldest known bird--too far advanced to be
the first bird--was about the size of a crow and was probably of
arboreal habits. Of great interest are its reptilian features, so
pronounced that one cannot evade the evolutionist suggestion. It had
teeth in both jaws, which no modern bird has; it had a long lizard-like
tail, which no modern bird has; it had claws on three fingers, and a
sort of half-made wing. That is to say, it does not show, what all
modern birds show, a fusion of half the wrist-bones with the whole of
the palm-bones, the well-known carpo-metacarpus bone which forms a basis
for the longest pinions. In many reptiles, such as Crocodiles, there are
peculiar bones running across the abdomen beneath the skin, the
so-called "abdominal ribs," and it seems an eloquent detail to find
these represented in _Archæopteryx_, the earliest known bird. No modern
bird shows any trace of them. [Illustration: SKELETON OF AN EXTINCT
FLIGHTLESS TOOTHED BIRD, HESPERORNIS

(_After Marsh._)

The bird was five or six feet high, something like a swimming ostrich,
with a very powerful leg but only a vestige of a wing. There were sharp
teeth in a groove. The modern divers come nearest to this ancient
type.]

[Illustration: SIX STAGES IN THE EVOLUTION OF THE HORSE, SHOWING GRADUAL
INCREASE IN SIZE

(_After Lull and Matthew._)

1. Four-toed horse, Eohippus, about one foot high. Lower Eocene, N.
America.

2. Another four-toed horse, Orohippus, a little over a foot high. Middle
Eocene, N. America.

3. Three-toed horse, Mesohippus, about the size of a sheep. Middle
Oligocene, N. America.

4. Three-toed horse, Merychippus, Miocene, N. America. Only one toe
reaches the ground on each foot, but the remains of two others are
prominent.

5. The first one-toed horse, Pliohippus, about forty inches high at the
shoulder. Pliocene, N. America.

6. The modern horse, running on the third digit of each foot.]

There is no warrant for supposing that the flying reptiles or
Pterodactyls gave rise to birds, for the two groups are on different
lines, and the structure of the wings is entirely different. Thus the
long-fingered Pterodactyl wing was a parachute wing, while the secret of
the bird's wing has its centre in the feathers. It is highly probable
that birds evolved from certain Dinosaurs which had become bipeds, and
it is possible that they were for a time swift runners that took "flying
jumps" along the ground. Thereafter, perhaps, came a period of arboreal
apprenticeship during which there was much gliding from tree to tree
before true flight was achieved. It is an interesting fact that the
problem of flight has been solved four times among animals--by insects,
by Pterodactyls, by birds, and by bats; and that the four solutions are
on entirely different lines.

In the _Cretaceous_ period the outstanding events included the waning of
giant reptiles, the modernising of the flowering plants, and the
multiplication of small mammals. Some of the Permian reptiles, such as
the dog-toothed Cynodonts, were extraordinarily mammal-like, and it was
probably from among them that definite mammals emerged in the Triassic.
Comparatively little is known of the early Triassic mammals save that
their back-teeth were marked by numerous tubercles on the crown, but
they were gaining strength in the late Triassic when small arboreal
insectivores, not very distant from the modern tree-shrews (_Tupaia_),
began to branch out in many directions indicative of the great divisions
of modern mammals, such as the clawed mammals, hoofed mammals, and the
race of monkeys or Primates. In the Upper Cretaceous there was an
exuberant "radiation" of mammals, adaptive to the conquest of all sorts
of haunts, and this was vigorously continued in Tertiary times.

There is no difficulty in the fact that the earliest remains of definite
mammals in the Triassic precede the first-known bird in the Jurassic.
For although we usually rank mammals as higher than birds (being mammals
ourselves, how could we do otherwise?), there are many ways in which
birds are pre-eminent, e.g. in skeleton, musculature, integumentary
structures, and respiratory system. The fact is that birds and mammals
are on two quite different tacks of evolution, not related to one
another, save in having a common ancestry in extinct reptiles. Moreover,
there is no reason to believe that the Jurassic _Archæopteryx_ was the
first bird in any sense except that it is the first of which we have any
record. In any case it is safe to say that birds came to their own
before mammals did.

Looking backwards, we may perhaps sum up what is most essential in the
Mesozoic era in Professor Schuchert's sentence: "The Mesozoic is the Age
of Reptiles, and yet the little mammals and the toothed birds are
storing up intelligence and strength to replace the reptiles when the
cycads and conifers shall give way to the higher flowering plants."


§ 2

The Cenozoic or Tertiary Era

In the _Eocene_ period there was a replacement of the small-brained
archaic mammals by big-brained modernised types, and with this must be
associated the covering of the earth with a garment of grass and dry
pasture. Marshes were replaced by meadows and browsing by grazing
mammals. In the spreading meadows an opportunity was also offered for a
richer evolution of insects and birds.

During the _Oligocene_ the elevation of the land continued, the climate
became much less moist, and the grazing herds extended their range.

The _Miocene_ was the mammalian Golden Age and there were crowning
examples of what Osborn calls "adaptive radiation." That is to say,
mammals, like the reptiles before them, conquer every haunt of life.
There are flying bats, volplaning parachutists, climbers in trees like
sloths and squirrels, quickly moving hoofed mammals, burrowers like the
moles, freshwater mammals, like duckmole and beaver, shore-frequenting
seals and manatees, and open-sea cetaceans, some of which dive far more
than full fathoms five. It is important to realise the perennial
tendency of animals to conquer every corner and to fill every niche of
opportunity, and to notice that this has been done by successive sets of
animals in succeeding ages. _Most notably the mammals repeat all the
experiments of reptiles on a higher turn of the spiral._ Thus arises
what is called convergence, the superficial resemblance of unrelated
types, like whales and fishes, the resemblance being due to the fact
that the different types are similarly adapted to similar conditions of
life. Professor H. F. Osborn points out that mammals may seek any one of
the twelve different habitat-zones, and that in each of these there may
be six quite different kinds of food. Living creatures penetrate
everywhere like the overflowing waters of a great river in flood.


§ 3

The _Pliocene_ period was a more strenuous time, with less genial
climatic conditions, and with more intense competition. Old land bridges
were broken and new ones made, and the geographical distribution
underwent great changes. Professor R. S. Lull describes the _Pliocene_
as "a period of great unrest." "Many migrations occurred the world over,
new competitions arose, and the weaker stocks began to show the effects
of the strenuous life. One momentous event seems to have occurred in the
Pliocene, and that was the transformation of the precursor of humanity
into man--the culmination of the highest line of evolution."

The _Pleistocene_ period was a time of sifting. There was a continued
elevation of the continental masses, and Ice Ages set in, relieved by
less severe interglacial times when the ice-sheets retreated northwards
for a time. Many types, like the mammoth, the woolly rhinoceros, the
sabre-toothed tiger, the cave-lion, and the cave-bear, became extinct.
Others which formerly had a wide range became restricted to the Far
North or were left isolated here and there on the high mountains, like
the Snow Mouse, which now occurs on isolated Alpine heights above the
snow-line. Perhaps it was during this period that many birds of the
Northern Hemisphere learned to evade the winter by the sublime device of
migration.

Looking backwards we may quote Professor Schuchert again:

    "The lands in the Cenozoic began to bloom with more and more
    flowering plants and grand hardwood forests, the atmosphere is
    scented with sweet odours, a vast crowd of new kinds of insects
    appear, and the places of the once dominant reptiles of the lands
    and seas are taken by the mammals. Out of these struggles there
    rises a greater intelligence, seen in nearly all of the mammal
    stocks, but particularly in one, the monkey-ape-man. Brute man
    appears on the scene with the introduction of the last glacial
    climate, a most trying time for all things endowed with life, and
    finally there results the dominance of reasoning man over all his
    brute associates."

In man and human society the story of evolution has its climax.


The Ascent of Man

Man stands apart from animals in his power of building up general ideas
and of using these in the guidance of his behaviour and the control of
his conduct. This is essentially wrapped up with his development of
language as an instrument of thought. Some animals have words, but man
has language (Logos). Some animals show evidence of _perceptual_
inference, but man often gets beyond this to _conceptual_ inference
(Reason). Many animals are affectionate and brave, self-forgetful and
industrious, but man "thinks the ought," definitely guiding his conduct
in the light of ideals, which in turn are wrapped up with the fact that
he is "a social person."

Besides his big brain, which may be three times as heavy as that of a
gorilla, man has various physical peculiarities. He walks erect, he
plants the sole of his foot flat on the ground, he has a chin and a good
heel, a big forehead and a non-protrusive face, a relatively uniform set
of teeth without conspicuous canines, and a relatively naked body.

[Illustration: DIAGRAM SHOWING SEVEN STAGES IN THE EVOLUTION OF THE
FORE-LIMBS AND HIND-LIMBS OF THE ANCESTORS OF THE MODERN HORSE,
BEGINNING WITH THE EARLIEST KNOWN PREDECESSORS OF THE HORSE AND
CULMINATING WITH THE HORSE OF TO-DAY

(_After Marsh and Lull._)

1 and 1A, fore-limb and hind-limb of Eohippus; 2 and 2A, Orohippus; 3
and 3A, Mesohippus; 4 and 4A, Hypohippus; 5 and 5A, Merychippus; 6 and
6A, Hipparion; 7 and 7A, the modern horse. Note how the toes shorten and
disappear.]

[Illustration: A. Fore-limb of Monkey B. Fore-limb of Whale

WHAT IS MEANT BY HOMOLOGY? ESSENTIAL SIMILARITY OF ARCHITECTURE, THOUGH
THE APPEARANCES MAY BE VERY DIFFERENT

This is seen in comparing these two fore-limbs, A, of Monkey, B, of
Whale. They are as different as possible, yet they show the same bones,
e.g. SC, the scapula or shoulder-blade; H, the humerus or upper arm; R
and U, the radius and ulna of the fore-arm; CA, the wrist; MC, the palm;
and then the fingers.]

But in spite of man's undeniable apartness, there is no doubt as to his
solidarity with the rest of creation. There is an "all-pervading
similitude of structure," between man and the Anthropoid Apes, though it
is certain that it is not from any living form that he took his origin.
None of the anatomical distinctions, except the heavy brain, could be
called momentous. Man's body is a veritable museum of relics (vestigial
structures) inherited from pre-human ancestors. In his everyday bodily
life and in some of its disturbances, man's pedigree is often revealed.
Even his facial expression, as Darwin showed, is not always human. Some
fossil remains bring modern man nearer the anthropoid type.

It is difficult not to admit the ring of truth in the closing words of
Darwin's _Descent of Man_:

    "We must, however, acknowledge, as it seems to me, that man, with
    all his noble qualities, with sympathy which feels for the most
    debased, with benevolence which extends not only to other men but to
    the humblest living creature, with his God-like intellect which has
    penetrated into the movements and constitution of the solar
    system--with all these exalted powers--man still bears in his bodily
    frame the indelible stamp of his lowly origin."


THE EVOLVING SYSTEM OF NATURE

There is another side of evolution so obvious that it is often
overlooked, the tendency to link lives together in vital
inter-relations. Thus flowers and their insect visitors are often
vitally interlinked in mutual dependence. Many birds feed on berries and
distribute the seeds. The tiny freshwater snail is the host of the
juvenile stages of the liver-fluke of the sheep. The mosquito is the
vehicle of malaria from man to man, and the tse-tse fly spreads sleeping
sickness. The freshwater mussel cannot continue its race without the
unconscious co-operation of the minnow, and the freshwater fish called
the bitterling cannot continue its race without the unconscious
co-operation of the mussel. There are numerous mutually beneficial
partnerships between different kinds of creatures, and other
inter-relations where the benefit is one-sided, as in the case of
insects that make galls on plants. There are also among kindred animals
many forms of colonies, communities, and societies. Nutritive chains
bind long series of animals together, the cod feeding on the whelk, the
whelk on the worm, the worm on the organic dust of the sea. There is a
system of successive incarnations and matter is continually passing from
one embodiment to another. These instances must suffice to illustrate
the central biological idea of the web of life, the interlinked System
of Animate Nature. Linnæus spoke of the Systema Naturæ, meaning the
orderly hierarchy of classes, orders, families, genera, and species; but
we owe to Darwin in particular some knowledge of a more dynamic Systema
Naturæ, the network of vital inter-relations. This has become more and
more complex as evolution has continued, and man's web is most complex
of all. It means making Animate Nature more of a unity; it means an
external method of registering steps of progress; it means an evolving
set of sieves by which new variations are sifted, and living creatures
are kept from slipping down the steep ladder of evolution.


Parasitism

It sometimes happens that the inter-relation established between one
living creature and another works in a retrograde direction. This is the
case with many thoroughgoing internal parasites which have sunk into an
easygoing kind of life, utterly dependent on their host for food,
requiring no exertions, running no risks, and receiving no spur to
effort. Thus we see that evolution is not necessarily progressive;
everything depends on the conditions in reference to which the living
creatures have been evolved. When the conditions are too easygoing, the
animal may be thoroughly well adapted to them--as a tapeworm certainly
is--but it slips down the rungs of the ladder of evolution.

This is an interesting minor chapter in the story of evolution--the
establishment of different kinds of parasites, casual and constant,
temporary and lifelong, external hangers-on and internal unpaying
boarders, those that live in the food-canal and depend on the host's
food and those that inhabit the blood or the tissues and find their food
there. It seems clear that ichneumon grubs and the like which hatch
inside a caterpillar and eat it alive are not so much parasites as
"beasts of prey" working from within.

But there are two sides to this minor chapter: there is the evolution of
the parasite, and there is also the evolution of counteractive measures
on the part of the host. Thus there is the maintenance of a bodyguard of
wandering amoeboid cells, which tackle the microbes invading the body
and often succeed in overpowering and digesting them. Thus, again, there
is the protective capacity the blood has of making antagonistic
substances or "anti-bodies" which counteract poisons, including the
poisons which the intruding parasites often make.


THE EVIDENCES OF EVOLUTION--HOW IT CAME ABOUT

§ 1

Progress in Evolution

There has often been slipping back and degeneracy in the course of
evolution, but the big fact is that there has been progress. For
millions of years Life has been slowly creeping upwards, and if we
compare the highest animals--Birds and Mammals--with their predecessors,
we must admit that they are more controlled, more masters of their
fate, with more mentality. Evolution is on the whole _integrative_; that
is to say, it makes against instability and disorder, and towards
harmony and progress. Even in the rise of Birds and Mammals we can
discern that the evolutionary process was making towards a fuller
embodiment or expression of what Man values most--control, freedom,
understanding, and love. The advance of animal life through the ages has
been chequered, but on the whole it has been an advance towards
increasing fullness, freedom, and fitness of life. In the study of this
advance--the central fact of Organic Evolution--there is assuredly much
for Man's instruction and much for his encouragement.


Evidences of Evolution

In all this, it may be said, the fact of evolution has been taken for
granted, but what are the evidences? Perhaps it should be frankly
answered that the idea of evolution, that the present is the child of
the past and the parent of the future, cannot be _proved_ as one may
prove the Law of Gravitation. All that can be done is to show that it is
a key--a way of looking at things--that fits the facts. There is no lock
that it does not open.

But if the facts that the evolution theory vividly interprets be called
the evidences of its validity, there is no lack of them. There is
_historical_ evidence; and what is more eloquent than the general fact
that fishes emerge before amphibians, and these before reptiles, and
these before birds, and so on? There are wonderfully complete fossil
series, e.g. among cuttlefishes, in which we can almost see evolution in
process. The pedigree of horse and elephant and crocodile is in general
very convincing, though it is to be confessed that there are other cases
in regard to which we have no light. Who can tell, for instance, how
Vertebrates arose or from what origin?

There is _embryological_ evidence, for the individual development often
reads like an abbreviated recapitulation of the presumed evolution of
the race. The mammal's visceral clefts are tell-tale evidence of remote
aquatic ancestors, breathing by gills. Something is known in regard to
the historical evolution of antlers in bygone ages; the Red Deer of
to-day recapitulates at least the general outlines of the history. The
individual development of an asymmetrical flat-fish, like a plaice or
sole, which rests and swims on one side, tells us plainly that its
ancestors were symmetrical fishes.

There is what might be called _physiological_ evidence, for many plants
and animals are variable before our eyes, and evolution is going on
around us to-day. This is familiarly seen among domesticated animals and
cultivated plants, but there is abundant flux in Wild Nature. It need
hardly be said that some organisms are very conservative, and that
change need not be expected when a position of stable equilibrium has
been secured.

There is also _anatomical_ evidence of a most convincing quality. In the
fore-limbs of backboned animals, say, the paddle of a turtle, the wing
of a bird, the flipper of a whale, the fore-leg of a horse, and the arm
of a man; the same essential bones and muscles are used to such diverse
results! What could it mean save blood relationship? And as to the two
sets of teeth in whalebone whales, which never even cut the gum, is
there any alternative but to regard them as relics of useful teeth which
ancestral forms possessed? In short, the evolution theory is justified
by the way in which it works.


§ 2

Factors in Evolution

If it be said "So much for the _fact_ of evolution, but what of the
_factors_?" the answer is not easy. For not only is the problem the
greatest of all scientific problems, but the inquiry is still very
young. The scientific study of evolution practically dates from the
publication of _The Origin of Species_ in 1859.

Heritable novelties or variations often crop up in living creatures, and
these form the raw material of evolution. These variations are the
outcome of expression of changes in the germ-cells that develop into
organisms. But why should there be changes in the constitution of the
germ-cells? Perhaps because the living material is very complex and
inherently liable to change; perhaps because it is the vehicle of a
multitude of hereditary items among which there are very likely to be
reshufflings or rearrangements; perhaps because the germ-cells have very
changeful surroundings (the blood, the body-cavity fluid, the
sea-water); perhaps because deeply saturating outside influences, such
as change of climate and habitat, penetrate through the body to its
germ-cells and provoke them to vary. But we must be patient with the
wearisome reiteration of "perhaps." Moreover, every many-celled organism
reproduced in the usual way, arises from an egg-cell fertilised by a
sperm-cell, and the changes involved in and preparatory to this
fertilisation may make new permutations and combinations of the living
items and hereditary qualities not only possible but necessary. It is
something like shuffling a pack of cards, but the cards are living. As
to the changes wrought on the body during its lifetime by peculiarities
in nurture, habits, and surroundings, these dents or modifications are
often very important for the individual, but it does not follow that
they are directly important for the race, since it is not certain that
they are transmissible.

Given a crop of variations or new departures or mutations, whatever the
inborn novelties may be called, we have then to inquire how these are
sifted. The sifting, which means the elimination of the relatively less
fit variations and the selection of the relatively more fit, effected in
many different ways in the course of the struggle for existence. The
organism plays its new card in the game of life, and the consequences
may determine survival. The relatively less fit to given conditions
will tend to be eliminated, while the relatively more fit will tend to
survive. If the variations are hereditary and reappear, perhaps
increased in amount, generation after generation, and if the process of
sifting continue consistently, the result will be the evolution of the
species. The sifting process may be helped by various forms of
"isolation" which lessen the range of free intercrossing between members
of a species, e.g. by geographical barriers. Interbreeding of similar
forms tends to make a stable stock; out-breeding among dissimilars tends
to promote variability. But for an outline like this it is enough to
suggest the general method of organic evolution: Throughout the ages
organisms have been making tentatives--new departures of varying
magnitude--and these tentatives have been tested. The method is that of
testing all things and holding fast that which is good.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

(The following short list may be useful to readers who desire to have
further books recommended to them.)

 CLODD, _Story of Creation: A Plain Account of Evolution._
 DARWIN, _Origin of Species, Descent of Man._
 DEPERET, _Transformation of the Animal World_ (Internat. Sci. Series).
 GEDDES AND THOMSON, _Evolution_ (Home University Library).
 GOODRICH, _Evolution_ (The People's Books).
 HEADLEY, _Life and Evolution._
 HUTCHINSON, H. NEVILLE, _Extinct Monsters_ (1892).
 LULL, _Organic Evolution._
 MCCABE, _A B C of Evolution._
 METCALF, _Outline of the Theory of Organic Evolution._
 OSBORN, H. F., _The Evolution of Life_ (1921).
 THOMSON, _Darwinism and Human Life._
 WALLACE, _Darwinism._



